.NET SDK workloads overview spec (#100)
dotnet/designs: accepted/2020/workloads/workloads.md

## Detailed designs

This document is an overview. The following documents detail specific design topics:

* Design 1 (coming soon)
* Design 2 (coming soon)

## Goals

The goals for this proposal follow:

* Users can download the workloads that they need (like just ASP.NET Core, or just Xamarin, or both).
* It is easy to configure downloading a minimal set of files (build-only components) for environments like CI/CD servers, to limit resources used (wire cost, compute (for decompression), and disk I/O).
* Build errors are intuitive and helpful when developers are missing workloads for the projects they build.
* It is possible to install workloads in terms of project files, a kind of "workload restore" so that users don't need to write scripts to discover the specific workloads required. This is critical for a service like GitHub Actions.
* Users can update workloads without necessarily needing to install a newer version of the SDK. This includes being notified that workload updates are available.

> * Users can install workloads via any supported installation tool, such as the VS Installer, a Linux package manager, or the CLI.

Author: Ah, I should have clarified that they can use any of them, but not for a single SDK installation. A machine is not an interesting scope. Only SDK install is.

The key learning of .NET Core 1.x was that the .NET platform needs a separate versioning model than the one offered for NuGet library packages. A case in point is that you can update a single target framework value in a project, from `netcoreapp2.1` to `netcoreapp3.1`, to update all dependent platform components automatically (like for ASP.NET Core). The use of a single version for the platform makes it easy to update a project, and results in a stable configuration that is (for the most part) unaffected by package references.

This means that optional components will not become NuGet packages that require package references in project files, or that are acquired as part of package restore. Instead, a new system will be developed that is an evolution of the SDK composition system, that evolves from a physically monolithic SDK to a logically monolithic one. This approach will enable us to deliver SDK UX with .NET 5 that is similar in spirit to the .NET Core 3.1 SDK, with the acknowledgment that there is some regression in functionality (you don't get the kitchen and its sink by default).

> Since the first .NET Core release, we have delivered various types of "packs" as specialized packages on NuGet feeds ([example from 1.x and 2.x era](https://www.nuget.org/packages/runtime.win-x64.Microsoft.NETCore.App/); [example from 3.x+ era (unlisted)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.NETCore.App.Runtime.linux-x64)). We use NuGet for this purpose because many tools and services understand NuGet packages, it includes a concept of feeds (which can be private or public), and offers a global CDN (in the case of NuGet.org). These packs, however, are not intended to be directly referenced by project files, but are known to the .NET Core SDK as an implementation detail. We intend workloads to follow a similar model, with the difference that the .NET SDK will not have detailed built-in knowledge of packs, and that workloads will be separately acquirable and updatable from the SDK.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this sufficiently distinguishes packs and normal packages. Aren't packs an implementation detail (a very convenient one)

Reviewer: This paragraph would be more helpful if it came after introducing the relationship between workloads and packs. It's less important how we are using NuGet in a different way than how workloads and packs relate.

Author: Packs are an implementation detail of the SDK but a key part of this proposal. The doc states that they are specialized packages and (at least going forward) unlisted. That seems to be enough detail for the overview.

At this point of the doc, I haven't introduced how workload and packs relate since I'm talking about our practice to date, where we don't really have this distinction.

### Composition

> Workloads will be composed and distributed as a set of packs. Packs are just a compressed set of files, like the [ASP.NET Core runtime]((https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.AspNetCore.App.Runtime.linux-arm64)). They are not discoverable on their own, nor do they describe the other packs that may work with or require or the various scenarios in which they can be used. Today, there are many hard-coded [versions and packages described in MSBuild targets](https://github.com/dotnet/core-sdk/blob/edbdf82041abff369ed64e5d0d6fd590e75b5328/src/redist/targets/GenerateBundledVersions.targets) in the SDK that satisfy this need. Moving forward, we will externalize this compositional information into a set of workload manifest files. Each workload will include a manifest (likely distributed as its own small pack), and use it to describe the set of versioned components that it offers. MSBuild and potentially other tools will be updated to discover and read these manifests, to the end of honoring them in the build and any other relevant operations.

Reviewer: Split this paragraph, and in the first paragraph add that a variety of things will be included in packs (since you mentioned runtimes) including templates and design time components.

Reviewer: The term "versioned components" is confusing near the end. Either replace that work with "pack" or add a sentence that further clarifies that packs contained versioned components. Although I think I'd prefer to see the whole system defined with no use of the word "version" and then a section on how versioning works.

Reviewer: I think we want to be cautious flipping between the logical and physical view. Consider the phrase "Each workload will include.." Maybe "Each logical workload will have an associated manifest..."

Author: OK. I think I fixed those things.

> The target framework will be used as the primary currency in project files that establish a link to a workload. As part of a related effort, [target frameworks are being updated in .NET 5](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/master/accepted/2020/net5/net5.md) to include operating system information. This change will enable a direct link to OS-specific workloads. For example, a project that targets `net5-android` will need the .NET 5 Android workload (Xamarin.Android). A project that multi-targets `net5-android` and `net5-ios` will also need the .NET 5 iOS workload (Xamarin.iOS).

Reviewer: Is this a typo? I hope this is major/minor: `net5.0-android`

Author: yes, typo.

> The set of TFM to workload mappings will be finite, and defined by the workloads. The SDK will carry a copy of this mapping, but will defer to information carried as part of installed workloads when they present newer information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The set of TFM to workload mappings defined by the workloads. The SDK will carry a copy of this mapping, but will defer to information carried as part of installed workloads when they present newer information.
```

Reviewer: Since you already introduced manifests, it might be simpler to say manifest than "copy of this mapping", which would require a bit more rewording.

Author: I don't know if the SDK will carry a copy of the manifests or just the mappings. That feels like an implementation detail. The one thing it needs for sure is a copy of the mappings.

### Acquisition

Workloads will be acquired in two primary ways: via a supported installation tool or the .NET CLI.

Note: The term "supported installation tool" is intended to mean an installation system that exposes components and manages their dependencies. For example, Visual Studio Installer, Docker, and APT do that, while MSI and PKG don't.

Install tools must follow these rules for workloads it installs:

> * The workload manifest is included as a required dependency for all variants of the workload (some packs might be optional).

Reviewer: How will users select optional packs? If you mean that workloads will have variants that will contain different packs, I think we should make that more clear. Also, some packs need to be optional in CI I think

Author: Yes. This will become more obvious when the manifest spec is written. These are the bundles, within the workload.

* All referenced packs are included, matching the version specified in the workload manifest.

> Users should be able to install workloads via an install tool without any sense that there is a compositional model at play.

Reviewer: Can you clarify what this means? What is the experience that would give them a sense that there is a compositional model at play?

Author: The point is that they should never realize that there is a composition model at play. If they do the two things I referenced above, then they will not. Another way of saying this is that it will be deliver workloads via a supporter installation tool the wrong way, and then everything will break, at which point it will be obvious that there is a compositional model at play, because the product will produce poorly defined and unintelligible errors.

> The .NET CLI will expose a more extensive set of commands for interacting with workloads. The CLI may allow installing more than just workloads, such that the noun it exposes is not `workload` but something more general (TBD; `bundle` is used as the stand-in for a better term in the following examples). In this parlance, a workload is one kind of bundle.

Reviewer: I really dislike introducing a new word. I've preferred workload to optional component all along, but let's keep the number of words to a minimum. (replace bundle with workload here, imo)

Reviewer 2: I tend to agree - it seems like the CLI experience would be more intuitive if we used the same words.

> In this parlance, a workload is one kind of bundle.

This seems to imply there are other types of bundles, is this just future proofing or is there something else in mind?

Author: This is a new term. We have three levels:

- workloads (like Xamarin Android)
- The curated bundles of packs it exposes, one of which will be default, and the others optional.
- The packs

We could call the middle thing "components" but the middle thing doesn't really align with my definition of "component". A component usually has a well-defined interface and interaction model. The bundles lack that.

I got feedback from some else that sent me down the bundle path.

* `dotnet bundle install [bundle]` -- Installs a bundle by name.

> * `dotnet bundle restore [project]` -- Installs one or more workloads in terms of the dependent workloads found in one or more referenced projects. One can think of restore installing the default bundle for a workload. The workload may expose other opt-in bundles.

Reviewer: The idea of an opt-in bundle seems new. Can you introduce earlier what that scenario is with an example

Author: Fixed.

> * `dotnet bundle restore [project]` -- Installs one or more workloads in terms of the dependent workloads found in one or more referenced projects. One can think of restore installing the default bundle for a workload. The workload may expose other opt-in bundles.

Reviewer 3: Could we merge `dotnet bundle restore` into `dotnet restore`?

Reviewer 4: I agree. But we can also have a separate `dotnet sdk restore` to restore just the tools and sdks. useful for controlled env in scripting.

Author: No. There are a least two problems:

- A major goal is that we don't want workloads to participate in package graph calculation.
- We don't want restore to download gigabytes of content in any scenario. We think we need a new experience for large downloads.

* `dotnet bundle update [bundle | project]` -- Updates a bundle, in terms of a project, by name, or as part of updating all known bundles.

> We don't intend for the .NET CLI-based installation to be mix-and-matched with a package tool (like APT). Instead, we are thinking that an installation tool would provide a mapping file that mapped its packages to workloads, so that `dotnet bunble restore` could provide meaningful error messages that direct users to install workloads via the installation tools. We still need to spend more time defining interactions between the .NET CLI and an installation tools.

Reviewer 2: typo - should be `bundle`
```suggestion
We don't intend for the .NET CLI-based installation to be mix-and-matched with a package tool (like APT). Instead, we are thinking that an installation tool would provide a mapping file that mapped its packages to workloads, so that `dotnet bundle restore` could provide meaningful error messages that direct users to install workloads via the installation tools. We still need to spend more time defining interactions between the .NET CLI and an installation tools.
```

> We don't intend for the .NET CLI-based installation to be mix-and-matched with a package tool (like APT). Instead, we are thinking that an installation tool would provide a mapping file that mapped its packages to workloads, so that `dotnet bunble restore` could provide meaningful error messages that direct users to install workloads via the installation tools. We still need to spend more time defining interactions between the .NET CLI and an installation tools.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We don't intend for the .NET CLI-based installation to be mix-and-matched with a package tool (like APT). Instead, we are thinking that an installation tool would provide a mapping file that mapped its packages to workloads, so that `dotnet bundle restore` could provide meaningful error messages that direct users to install workloads via the installation tools. We still need to spend more time defining interactions between the .NET CLI and an installation tools.
```

Author: Someone else made the same fix. Thanks!

> In addition to being optional, workloads will be updatable. The SDK will include a mechanism to discover if a workload manifest pack has been updated. An updated manifest could represent bug fixes or new features (like updated bindings for an operating system update). If a manifest has been updated, the user will be notified, and have the opportunity to acquire the new version. Updates will not be automatic. This is roughly similar to the combination of `apt-get update` and `apt-get upgrade` with the [Debian package manager](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APT_(software)).

Reviewer: What does "In addition to being optional, workloads..." mean. If a TFM demands a workload, it isn't optional (rest of sentence - they are updatable - is good).

Reviewer: I'm not sure it's clear enough at this point to the reader that the manifest installed on disk reflects the workload on disk. "Updating the manifest" is a rather trivial sounding thing, which I think will make this paragraph confusing. I think some tweaks here will have good results.

Author: Well, this whole feature is about optional workloads, relative to the SDK. I think of workloads as having two main characteristics: optional and updatable. In some cases (like for ASP.NET Core templates), we might only use the updatable part. Fair?

Author: Simplified the wording.

### SDK and workload versioning

> Another benefit of the existing monolithic SDK is that the workloads it includes are known to be compatible with core SDK components, like the C# compiler, NuGet, MSBuild, and the SDK targets. Over time, we have developed the concept of an SDK version train. These are represented by SDK version hundreds bands like `3.1.100` and `3.1.200`. These version trains were created to align with Visual Studio versions, like `16.4` and `16.5`. We do this because those same core SDK components are shared between Visual Studio and the .NET SDK, and need to stay in alignment. In addition, new major versions of those components, possibly containing a new language version, can be delivered in these updates. We expect that workload manifests will need to be re-published for each SDK version train. That's an unfortunate requirement, however, the SDK version trains are a compatibility boundary that we would like to maintain.

Reviewer: We've been calling these "feature bands". I don't think this is a good place to introduce new language on that. 
```suggestion
Another benefit of the existing monolithic SDK is that the workloads it includes are known to be compatible with core SDK components, like the C# compiler, NuGet, MSBuild, and the SDK targets. Over time, we have developed the concept of an SDK feature bands. These are represented by SDK version hundreds bands like `3.1.100` and `3.1.200`. These feature bands align with Visual Studio versions, like `16.4` and `16.5`. We do this because those same core SDK components are shared between Visual Studio and the .NET SDK. In addition, new major versions of those components, possibly containing a new language version, can be delivered in feature bands. We expect that workload manifests will need to be re-published for each SDK feature band. 
```

> Another benefit of the existing monolithic SDK is that the workloads it includes are known to be compatible with core SDK components, like the C# compiler, NuGet, MSBuild, and the SDK targets. Over time, we have developed the concept of an SDK version train. These are represented by SDK version hundreds bands like `3.1.100` and `3.1.200`. These version trains were created to align with Visual Studio versions, like `16.4` and `16.5`. We do this because those same core SDK components are shared between Visual Studio and the .NET SDK, and need to stay in alignment. In addition, new major versions of those components, possibly containing a new language version, can be delivered in these updates. We expect that workload manifests will need to be re-published for each SDK version train. That's an unfortunate requirement, however, the SDK version trains are a compatibility boundary that we would like to maintain.

Reviewer 2: > We expect that workload manifests will need to be re-published for each SDK version train. That's an unfortunate requirement, however, the SDK version trains are a compatibility boundary that we would like to maintain.

I'm not entirely sure what this means, are you referring to the Nuget package that defines the component?

Author: Yes.

## Timing

This project has a very large scope, and requires changing how multiple large bodies of software work. We are planning the following multi-release progression to phase the work.

* .NET 5.0
  * Define manifest format and packaging.
  * Enable Xamarin and Web assembly as workloads.
  * Distribute these workloads only via Visual Studio (Windows and Mac).
  * Expose few if any .NET CLI verbs for acquisition.
* .NET 6.0+
  * Make WPF, Windows Forms and ASP.NET Core as workloads

>   * Enable acquisition of all workloads via the .NET CLI, and at least ASP.NET Core and Web Assembly workloads available via Linux package managers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Enable acquisition of workloads via the .NET CLI, and appropriate workloads available via Linux package managers.
```

Author: I am projecting what I want us to do, so I am leaving this as-is.

>   * Expose the full set of .NET CLI verbs for acquisition.

Reviewer: Can you combine this with the above?

Author: I see the relation, but they are logically separate (not even done by the same teams).

>   * Define interaction with installation tools.

Reviewer: It might be helpful to list these in dependency order, which means this one is first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Provide interaction between CLI verbs and installation tools.
```

But interact isn't quite the right word here.

Author: I went with "Define and implement interaction with installation tools."

﻿# .NET Optional SDK Workloads

> In .NET 5, we will add support for iOS, Android, and Web assembly projects. Up until .NET 5.0, we’ve delivered all supported workloads via a monolithic SDK. As the supported workloads of the .NET SDK grow (and we want them to), it is no longer tenable to deliver an "all-in-one / one-size-fits-all" SDK distribution. There are many challenges to a large monolithic SDK, with product build time and distribution size being the most significant. Instead, all new workloads will be built and delivered separately from the SDK, and will be acquirable via your favorite installation tool (like the Visual Studio Installer, a Linux package manager, or the .NET CLI). In the fullness of time, we intend for all .NET workloads to follow this pattern, resulting in a very small and focused SDK.

Reviewer 6: > Up until .NET 5.0

"5.0" vs "5"?

Author: Let's go with `5.0` in technical doc.

> In .NET 5, we will add support for iOS, Android, and Web assembly projects. Up until .NET 5.0, we’ve delivered all supported workloads via a monolithic SDK. As the supported workloads of the .NET SDK grow (and we want them to), it is no longer tenable to deliver an "all-in-one / one-size-fits-all" SDK distribution. There are many challenges to a large monolithic SDK, with product build time and distribution size being the most significant. Instead, all new workloads will be built and delivered separately from the SDK, and will be acquirable via your favorite installation tool (like the Visual Studio Installer, a Linux package manager, or the .NET CLI). In the fullness of time, we intend for all .NET workloads to follow this pattern, resulting in a very small and focused SDK.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In .NET 5, we will add support for iOS, Android, and Web assembly projects. Up until .NET 5, we’ve delivered all supported workloads via a monolithic SDK. As the supported workloads of the .NET SDK grow (and we want them to), it will no longer be tenable to deliver an "all-in-one / one-size-fits-all" SDK distribution. There are many challenges to a large monolithic SDK, with product build time and distribution size being the most significant. Instead, all new workloads will be built and delivered separately from the SDK, and will be acquirable via your favorite installation tool (like the Visual Studio Installer, a Linux package manager, or the .NET CLI). In the fullness of time, we intend for all .NET workloads to follow this pattern, resulting in a very small and focused SDK.
```

> In .NET 5, we will add support for iOS, Android, and Web assembly projects. Up until .NET 5.0, we’ve delivered all supported workloads via a monolithic SDK. As the supported workloads of the .NET SDK grow (and we want them to), it is no longer tenable to deliver an "all-in-one / one-size-fits-all" SDK distribution. There are many challenges to a large monolithic SDK, with product build time and distribution size being the most significant. Instead, all new workloads will be built and delivered separately from the SDK, and will be acquirable via your favorite installation tool (like the Visual Studio Installer, a Linux package manager, or the .NET CLI). In the fullness of time, we intend for all .NET workloads to follow this pattern, resulting in a very small and focused SDK.

Author: ```suggestion
In .NET 5.0, we will add support for iOS, Android, and Web assembly projects. Up until .NET 5.0, we’ve delivered all supported workloads via a monolithic SDK. As the supported workloads of the .NET SDK grow (and we want them to), it is no longer tenable to deliver an "all-in-one / one-size-fits-all" SDK distribution. There are many challenges to a large monolithic SDK, with product build time and distribution size being the most significant. Instead, all new workloads will be built and delivered separately from the SDK, and will be acquirable via your favorite installation tool (like the Visual Studio Installer, a Linux package manager, or the .NET CLI). In the fullness of time, we intend for all .NET workloads to follow this pattern, resulting in a very small and focused SDK.
```

While the monolithic SDK model has become a liability, it was an important design point for .NET Core 2.x and 3.x. This approach enabled us to deliver two key value propositions with the SDK: providing a coherent set of tested workloads (which reduced our test matrix/burden), and enabling offline scenarios (`dotnet new` + `dotnet run` work by default -- for in-box templates -- with no internet). Going forward, it is important to retain those values, even as we move to a fundamentally different SDK composition model.

> As part of .NET Core 3.1, we finally enabled [source build](https://github.com/dotnet/source-build) for .NET. From the beginning of the .NET Core project, we've wanted to enable the open source community to "do anything" with .NET source code, and for distro owners to be able to ingest .NET (via their own build mechanisms and policies) into their package archive. We are now seeing the first indicators that distro maintainers will take advantage of .NET source building capable, now that it is functional. It is critical that .NET source build capabilities are extended to include the new optional workload model so that the community can build all workloads for their scenarios. In fact, we hope that source build will become simpler and more efficient with this model.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
As part of .NET Core 3.1, we enabled [source build](https://github.com/dotnet/source-build) for .NET. From the beginning of the .NET Core project, we've wanted to enable the open source community to "do anything" with .NET source code, and for distro owners to be able to ingest .NET (via their own build mechanisms and policies) into their package archive. We are now seeing the first indicators that distro maintainers will take advantage of .NET source building capable, now that it is functional. It is critical that .NET source build capabilities are extended to include the new optional workload model so that the community can build all workloads for their scenarios. In fact, we hope that source build will become simpler and more efficient with this model.
```

Each workload will expose a set of bundles of packs that a users can use. One of these bundles will be the default one you get to satisfy a TFM. Additional bundles will offer additional functionality. For example, Android AOT support would be exposed as an additional bundle, not provided by the default bundle. These additional bundles can be referenced as a required dependency of a project as a project property or installed manually via the CLI or a supported installation tool.

### Acquisition

Workloads will be acquired in two primary ways: via a supported installation tool or the .NET CLI.

Note: The term "supported installation tool" is intended to describe an installation system that exposes components and manages their dependencies. For example, Visual Studio Installer, Docker, and APT do that, while MSI and PKG don't.

Install tools must follow these rules for workloads it installs:

* The workload manifest is included as a required dependency for all variants of the workload (some packs might be optional).
* All referenced packs are included, matching the version specified in the workload manifest.

> It should never be obvious to users that there is a compositional model at play. In particular, .NET tools should not produce errors because the workload manifest and required files are out of alignment in some way.

Reviewer 6: If they are "out of alignment in some way", what will tools do instead of error'ing?  Is this comment saying that this is a valid situation that tools need to handle, and if so, what is the intended outcome?

Author: I took another run at that text.

## Timing

This project has a very large scope, and requires changing how multiple large bodies of software work. We are planning the following multi-release progression to phase the work.

* .NET 5.0
  * Define manifest format and packaging.
  * Enable Xamarin and Web assembly as workloads.
  * Distribute these workloads only via Visual Studio (Windows and Mac).
  * Expose few if any .NET CLI verbs for acquisition.
* .NET 6.0+
  * Expose the full set of .NET CLI verbs for acquisition.

>   * Make WPF, Windows Forms and ASP.NET Core as workloads

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * Separate out / expose WPF, Windows Forms and ASP.NET Core as workloads
```
